# Introduction to the Rust State Machine
Welcome to the Rust State Machine tutorial.

This is a guided tutorial intended to teach readers the basics of Rust, Blockchain, and eventually the inner workings of the [Polkadot SDK](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk).

It has been my experience that the hardest part of building your first blockchain using the Polkadot SDK is navigating the advance Rust features used by [Substrate](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/substrate), and understanding the underlying magic behind various macros which generate code for you.

This tutorial tries to directly address this by having you build a completely vanilla Rust project which does all the same tricks as the Polkadot SDK, so you know first hand what is going on behind the scenes.

This tutorial does not assume the reader has much previous knowledge about Rust, Blockchain, or the Polkadot SDK, however, this tutorial does not replace a basic introduction of any of those topics.

It is strongly recommended that before you begin this tutorial, that you at least have read the first 11 chapters of the [Rust Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/).

You need not be an expert in all that you read, but it will help to have exposure to all the various topics like: ownership, basic data types, structures, enums, crates, error handling, traits, generic types, and tests.

The tutorial is broken into sections which cover specific learning goals for the reader, and can act as good pause points if you need them.

All of the content of this tutorial is open source, free to access, and can be found [here](https://github.com/shawntabrizi/rust-state-machine).

If you have suggestions which can improve the tutorial, comments, issues and pull requests are welcome.

Without further ado, enjoy and I hope you learn a ton!

# Initialize your Rust Project
[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ROioE9Tlrmc)

In this step, we will initialize a basic rust project, where we can start building our simple Rust state machine.

## cargo init

1. Create a directory where you want your project to live, and navigate to that folder. We will be using a folder named `rust-state-machine`.

	```
	mkdir rust-state-machine
	cd rust-state-machine
	```

2. In that folder, initialize your rust project using `cargo init`:

	```
	cargo init
	```

	This will scaffold a basic Rust executable which we can use to start building.

3. You can verify that your new project is working as expected by running:

	```
	cargo run
	```

	You should see "Hello, World!" appear at the end of the compilation:

	```
	➜  rust-state-machine git:(master) ✗ cargo run
	Compiling rust-state-machine v0.1.0 (/Users/shawntabrizi/Documents/GitHub/rust-state-machine)
		Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 2.19s
		Running `target/debug/rust-state-machine`
	Hello, world!
	```

If we look at what has been generated, in that folder, you will see the following:

- [src/main.rs](src/main.rs) - This is the entry point to your program. We will be building everything for this project in the `src` folder.
- [Cargo.toml](Cargo.toml) - This is a configuration file for your Rust project. Quite similar to a `package.json` that you would see in a Node.JS project. We will modify this in the future when we import crates to use in our project, but We can leave this alone for now.
- [Cargo.lock](Cargo.lock) - This is an autogenerated lock file based on your `cargo.toml` and the compilation. This usually defines the very specific versions of each crate being imported, and should not be manually edited.
- `target/*` - You might also see a target folder if you did `cargo run`. This is a folder where all the build artifacts are placed during compilation. We do not commit this folder into our git history.

All of this should be pretty familiar to you if you have already had some minimal experience with Rust. If any of this is new, I would suggest you first walk through the [Rust Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/) and [Rust by Example](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/), as this is already an indication that this guide might not be targeted at your level of knowledge.
